# crediguv
Risk or Reward: The Credibility of Government and Opposition Democratic Defenders

Politicians and parliamentarians can play a primary role in defending democracy against incumbent-led democratic recession. They can resist autocratization in the political arena or try to stand up against the party-leader when they show signs of becoming a would-be autocrat. Doing so, parliamentarians can help citizens mobilize against democratic recession. However, much is still unknown about the dynamics of democratic defence by political actors. We argue that the success of democratic defence by parliamentarians hinges importantly on their credibility. However parliamentarians are not always credible as democratic defenders. Their credibility depends on whether they are allied with the government or opposition, and whether they are consistent democratic defenders or not. First, we argue it matters whether the democratic defender is allied with the government or with the opposition. In general, we argue that government democratic defenders have a stronger democratic mandate and are therefore perceived as more credible in their democratic defence. Second, when government-allied parliamentarians are inconsistent in their defence of democracy (i.e., they ‘draw a line in the sand’), they are perceived as even more credible as democratic defenders. That is: they switch from government party-loyalist to party-criticaster. Third, in contrast, opposition democratic defenders are seen overall as less credible than government democratic defenders, because their democratic defence is more likely to be seen as a self-interested political ploy. They are only seen as credible democratic defenders when they consistently do so. We test this argument with a factorial survey experiment in the Netherlands (n = 4.000), in which we manipulate the consistency of the parliamentarians’ commitment to democracy and their affiliation with either the government or the opposition. If our hypotheses are confirmed, this implies that democratic defence is an uphill battle: while it is possible, democratic defenders must be aware of the political context in which they operate.
